## Introduction 

Successful python projects pay close attention to the modular organisation of their code. Modularisation is perhaps the most important conceptual tool we have for managing systems as they grow from trivial to tremendous. Python language has some features which support that modularisation. 

## Module 

- Module is the basic tool for organising code. 
- It is normally a single python source file. 
- Modules are imported using `import` keyword.
- When a module is imported, it is represented by an object of type `module` and you can interact with it just like any other object.

## Package

- A package in python is just a special type of module. 
- It can contain other modules, including other packages.
- It is a way to define hierarchies of modules.
- This allows for grouping of modules together which have same functionality to express their cohesiveness. 

Lets import `urllib` and `urllib.request`. Both of these are objects of type `module`.

```
>>> import urllib
>>> import urllib.request
>>> type(urllib)
<class 'module'>
>>> type(urllib.request)
<class 'module'>
```

In this case, `urllib` is a package and `urllib.request` is nested . So, `request` is a normal module nested inside `urllib`. Also notice that only `urllib` is bound to a name in the local namespace. So it is not possible to access the `request` module directly. When imported this way, access to the sub-module must be via a fully qualified hierarchical module name. 

```
>>> from urllib import request
>>> request
<module 'urllib.request' from '/usr/lib/python3.7/urllib/request.py'>
```
From import syntax makes it possible to import a sub-module directly.`from urllib import request` will bind only `request` to a name in the local namespace. The parent `urllib` package will have been imported but won't be directly accessible via the `urllib` name.  Even when imported this way, the sub-module knows its hierarchical module name. 

Notice an important difference between both objects `urllib` and `urllib.request`. `urllib` has the dunder path attribute whereas the other doesn't have.

```
>>> import urllib
>>> import urllib.request
>>> urllib.__path__
['/usr/lib/python3.7/urllib']
>>> urllib.request.__path__
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: module 'urllib.request' has no attribute '__path__'
```

The `__path__` attribute is a list of file system paths indicating where `urllib` searches to find nested modules. This hints at the nature of distinction between packages and modules.

Packages are generally represented by the directories in a file system while modules are represented by single files.

## How python locates modules ?

How does python know where to look for a source file while importing and loading that code. The answer is that python checks the path attribute of the standard sys module.

The `sys.path` is a list of directories. When you ask python to import a module, it starts with the first directory and checks for an appropriate file. If no match is found, then subsequent directories are checked in order. The first match provides the module and python loads the code. If python runs out of all directories, `ImportError` is raised. 

So one way to make a source file available for import is add its directory in the `sys.path` by using `sys.path.append(<directory>)`.

There is another way to add entries to `sys.path`  that doesn't require direct manipulation of that list. The `PYTHONPATH` environment variable is a list of paths that gets added to `sys.path` when python starts.

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTc2MTAyODQxM119
-->