



## Creating Packages

- First create a package root directory. This root directory needs to be in some path mentioned in the attribute `sys.path`.
- Then in that root directory, create a file called `__init__.py`. This file often known as the package init file is what makes the package a module.
- `__init__.py` can be and often is empty. Its presence alone suffices to establish package. 
- The existence of a package init file is an unambiguous signal that you intend for a directory to be a package and something that many python developers instinctively look for.

Lets create a package root directory known as `demo_reader` with a package init file. 

```
/tmp$ mkdir demo_reader
/tmp$ touch demo_reader/__init__.py
/tmp$ python
Python 3.7.7 (default, Mar 10 2020, 15:16:38) 
[GCC 7.5.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import demo_reader
>>> type(demo_reader)
<class 'module'>
>>> demo_reader.__file__
'/tmp/demo_reader/__init__.py'
```
The package `demo_reader` is an object of type `module` which is the same type that a single python file would have.  We see that the `demo_reader` is a module even though it is a directory in the file system. Furthermore, the source file which is executed  when `demo_reader` is imported is the package init file in the `demo_reader` directory.

**A package is nothing more than a directory containing a file named `__init__.py`**

Now that we have created some basic package, lets add more content to it. The goal would be to create a class that can read data from three different file formats.

- Read uncompressed text files.
- Read gzip-compressed files.
- Read bz2-compressed files.
 
 Create a file `multireader.py` inside `demo_reader` directory. Lets add the functionality for reading uncompressed files first and add support for other kind of compressed files later. 

```
class MultiReader:
    def __init__(self, filename):
        self.fileName = filename
        self.f = open(filename, 'rt')

    def close(self):
        self.f.close()

    def read(self):
        self.f.read()
```

Now, we can import this class and use it to read any uncompressed text file.

```
Python 3.7.7 (default, Mar 10 2020, 15:16:38) 
[GCC 7.5.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import demo_reader.multireader
>>> f = demo_reader.multireader.MultiReader("demo_reader/__init__.py")
>>> f.read()
'# init file for demo_reader\n'
>>> f.close()
```

To demonstrate how packages provide high-level structure to your python code, lets add a subpackage called `compressed` which will contain the code of working with compressed files.

```
/tmp$ cd demo_reader/
/tmp/demo_reader$ mkdir compressed
/tmp/demo_reader$ cd compressed/
/tmp/demo_reader/compressed$ touch __init__.py
```
The `__init__.py` empty file is enough to mark the `compressed` directory as a package. 
Now lets add some code to `gzipped.py` file under the `compressed` subpackage. 

```
import gzip
import sys
opener = gzip.open

if __name__ == '__main__':
	f = gzip.open(sys.argv[1],mode='wt')
	f.write(' ‘.join(sys.argv[2:]))
	f.close()
```

Lets add the code for bz2 files in `bzipped.py` under the `compressed` subpackage. 

```
import bz2
import sys

opener = bz2.open

if __name__ == '__main__':
	f = bz2.open(sys.argv[1], mode='wt')
	f.write(''.join(sys.argv[2:]))
	f.close()
```
At this point you should have a directory structure like this : 
```
demo_reader
	__init__.py
	multireader.py
	compressed
		__init__.py
		bzipped.py
		gzipped.py
```

Now we can import the top-level package, subpackage and modules : 
```
>>> import demo_reader
>>> import demo_reader.multireader
>>> import demo_reader.compressed
>>> import demo_reader.compressed.gzipped
>>> import demo_reader.compressed.bzipped
```

## Relative Imports

In the following **Absolute imports** you specify all the ancestral modules or any module you want to import. 
`import demo_reader.compressed.bzipped`
`from demo_reader.compressed import bzipped`
 
There is an alternative form i.e. **Relative Imports** that lets you use shortened paths to modules and packages. The obvious difference is the use of dots before the module name. 
The general syntax is `from ..module_name import name`. Each dot stands for ancestral package of the module that is doing the import starting with the subpackage containing the module and moving towards the package root. 

**Important Rules**
- You can only use the relative import using the `from module import name` syntax. `import .module` will give a syntax error.
- Relative imports can only be used to import modules within the current top-level package. 
- It is legal for the relative import to consist purely of dots - `from .. import name`

##  `__all__` Attribute

`__all__` lets you control which all attributes are imported when someone uses `from module import *`. If `__all__` is not specified, `from module import *` imports all public names i.e. those without leading underscores from the imported module. 

`__all__` must be a list of strings where each string indicates a name which will be imported when the * syntax is used.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTY1NDMwMTY3M119
-->