


## What are Plugins ?

Plugins are a technique for adding new functionality to a package without modifying the package itself. The package will define various extension points that can be extended with code outside of the package. The package will then use various discovery techniques to find and load those extensions at runtime. 

There are various methods for implementing plugins. The first approach uses namespace packages and the `pkgutil` module, while the second uses the entry points functionality of `setuptools`. 

## Plugins with Namespace Package

In this technique, the notion is that the core package defines a subpackage for extension. The core package will specify that one or more of its subpackages is open for extension. The core package will scan that subpackage at runtime to see what plugins have been configured. 

The first step is to create the core package which defines an extension point. 

```
# This is the main.py module of core package.
# package_x is the name of sub_package

# extension point
import package_x
```

The directory containing the above module looks like : 
```
project/
  core/
    main.py
```

For now, `main.py` will not be able to import package_x. So how to add plugins now to extend the functionality of `package_x` ?

Lets add plugins code in other directories as below. 

```
/tmp/
	project/
		plugin1/
			package_x/
				module_a.py
		plugin2/
			package_x/
			    module_b.py
	    core/
		    main.py
```

The above directory structure will enable the python's discovery mechanism to find the package_x directory as a namespace package. And for this to work we will have to add the directories containing the different parts of package_x in the PYTHONPATH. 

```
# This is the main.py module of core package.
# package_x is the name of sub_package

import sys
sys.path.extend(["/tmp/project/plugin1","/tmp/project/plugin2"])

# extension point
import package_x

print(package_x.__path__)
```

This gives the output --> `_NamespacePath(['/tmp/project/plugin1/package_x', '/tmp/project/plugin2/package_x'])`

So the discovery mechanism finds `package_x` as the namespace directory. Now lets find all the module names related to `package_x` using `pkgutil`

```
# This is the main.py module of core package.
# package_x is the name of sub_package

import sys
sys.path.extend(["/tmp/project/plugin1","/tmp/project/plugin2"])

# extension point
import package_x

allModulesInPackageX = pkgutil.iter_modules(package_x.__path__)
for _, moduleName, _ in allModulesInPackageX:
    print(moduleName)
```

This gives the following output. 
```
module_a
module_b
```

We have these module names as string. Can we import them using `importlib` ? 
Yes but we will need absolute names. 

```
# This is the main.py module of core package.
# package_x is the name of sub_package

import sys
sys.path.extend(["/tmp/project/plugin1","/tmp/project/plugin2"])

# extension point
import package_x

allModulesInPackageX = pkgutil.iter_modules(package_x.__path__, package_x.__name__ + ".")
for _, moduleName, _ in allModulesInPackageX:
    print(moduleName)
```

The second argument in `pkgutil.iter_modules` is a prefix that is put at the front of the names of the modules it returns. Hence the output of the above program is 
```
package_x.module_a
package_x.module_b
```
Since `/tmp/project/plugin1` and `/tmp/project/plugin2` are added in the PYTHONPATH, now we can use `importlib.import_module(<absolute module_name>)` to import both the modules for package_x. 

## Plugins with setuptools

Lets understand `setup.py` first with the following simple project directory structure.

```
project/
	core/
		__init__.py
		app.py
	__init__.py
	setup.py
```

**setup.py**
```
from setuptools import find_packages, setup

setup(
	name='project_x',
	version='1.0.0',
	packages=find_packages('core')
	entry_points={
		'app.commands' : [
			'help = core.commands:help_command',
			'validate = core.commands:validate_command'
		]
	} 
)
```

Lets understand the arguments passed in the setup function. 

- `name` : 
	- When you install a package, `setuptools` is going to install a little bit of metadata and it needs a directory to put that metadata into.
	- You can think of this as your project egg. 
	- This name should be unique.
- `packages` :
	- The files and sub-packages included in this list of packages will be the main code files picked up by the `setuptools` for installation and distribution. 
	- In this example, everything under `core` package is part of the distribution. 
	- `find_packages` recursively finds all sub-packages, returns a list of them.
- `entry_points`
	- This is in the form of a dictionary. 
	- The keys are the entry point names or groups. In the above example `app.commands` is the entry point name. The dot is just used to represent a hierarchy.
	- The value corresponding to a entry point is a list of extensions and extension objects. 
	- Each extension is in the form of `'<extension_name> = <extension_object>'`
- After installation of the project using `setuptools`, 
	- The names `help` and `validate` will be available in the current shell as executable.
	- These will execute their extension objects respectively. 

Now that we have understood how entry points work, lets see how we can use them to add more commands as plugins to the same project. 

Lets create a new plugin first. 

```
plugin_x/
	plugin/
		__init__.py
		commands.py
	setup.py
	__init__.py
```

**setup.py**
```
from setuptools import find_packages, setup

setup(
	name='project_x_plugin_x',
	version='1.0.0',
	packages=find_packages('plugin')
	entry_points={
		'app.commands' : [
			'find_error = plugin.commands:find_error_command',
			'calculate = plugin.commands:calculate_command'
		]
	} 
)
```

- Lets install this plugin using `setuptools`
- Now the entry point `app.commands` contains the following extensions 
	- `'help = core.commands:help_command'`
	- `'validate = core.commands:validate_command'`
	- `'find_error = plugin.commands:find_error_command'`
	- `'calculate = plugin.commands:calculate_command'`
- We can load all these commands in the main project's `app.py` using pkg_resources

**project/app.py**

```
import pkg_resources

# List of all commands function references
ALL_COMMANDS = [extension.load() for extension in pkg_resources.iter_entry_points('app.commands')]
```


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzNjExNjY0NzFdfQ==
-->