
## Source and Built Distribution

The distribution package is an archive of package contents that others can easily install in their own python environments. They come in various formats. 
- zip files
- tarballs
- wheels

There are two primary types of distribution packages.

|Built           |Source                         |
|----------------|-------------------------------|
|Can be placed directly into installation directory|Cannot be placed directly into installation directory|
|Build steps have already been performed| Contains everything needed to build the package         |
|Can be platform-specific|It is necessary to build the package before installing|

**Source distribution package**

The standard way to create a source distribution is by passing the `sdist` argument to your `setup.py`. Simply go to the directory containing `setup.py` and run `python setup.py sdist`. 

This will create a new directory named `dist` which will include a `.tar.gz` source distribution package which can then be installed using pip. 

**Built distribution package**

The most popular format for build distribution package is the wheel format.  

Simply go to the directory containing `setup.py` and run `python setup.py bdist_wheel`. This will create a `.whl` package which can then be installed using pip. 

Since built distributions might have platform or python version specific requirements, it is important that we would be able to tell when a distribution package can be used on a particular system. 

The wheel distribution includes this information in their file name. 

Lets suppose the wheel distribution file name is `package_name-version-py3-none-any.whl`
The part `py3-none-any` tells us when can this package be used.
- `py3` tells us what python versions this package will work with. 
- `none` indicates application binary interface requirements. `none` indicates that the project involves pure python code.
- `any` tells us what platforms or operating systems it will work on. `any` indicates there are no platform specific requirements.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExMDY0MzI4MzVdfQ==
-->